feat: Add `otelcol.storage.file` support (#3209)
grafana/alloy: docs/sources/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.storage.file.md

---

> canonical: https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.storage.file/
> aliases:
>   - ../otelcol.storage.file/ # /docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/otelcol.storage.file/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
canonical: https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.storage.file/
```

I wouldn't add an alias in this case. The file has never been published to that other location. We only really need aliases for files that have been published, and then renamed/moved.

Author: Oops, a copy paste issue. 👍

description: Learn about otelcol.storage.file

> title: otelcol.storage.file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: otelcol.storage.file
labels:
  stage: public-preview
```

---

# `otelcol.storage.file`

{{< docs/shared lookup="stability/public_preview.md" source="alloy" version="<ALLOY_VERSION>" >}}

`otelcol.storage.file` exposes a `handler` that can be used by other `otelcol`
components to write state to a local directory. 
The current implementation of this component uses [bbolt][] to store and read data on disk.

{{< admonition type="note" >}}
`otelcol.storage.file` is a wrapper over the upstream OpenTelemetry Collector `filestorage` extension.
Bug reports or feature requests will be redirected to the upstream repository, if necessary.
{{< /admonition >}}

> Multiple `otelcol.storage.file` components can be specified by giving them different labels.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can specify multiple `otelcol.storage.file` components by giving them different labels.
```

[bbolt]: https://github.com/etcd-io/bbolt

## Usage

```alloy

> otelcol.storage.file "LABEL" {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
otelcol.storage.file "<LABEL>" {
```

You can use the following arguments with `otelcol.storage.file`:

| Name                    | Type            | Description                                                                                 | Default | Required |
|-------------------------|-----------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------|----------|
| `create_directory`      | `bool`          | Will the component be responsible for creating the `directory`.                             | `true`  | no       |
| `directory`             | `string`        | The path to the dedicated data storage directory .                                          | *       | no       |
| `directory_permissions` | `string`        | The octal file permissions used when creating the `directory` if `create_directory` is set. | `0750`  | no       |
| `fsync`                 | `bool`          | Will fsync be called after each write operation.                                            | `false` | no       |
| `timeout`               | `time.Duration` | The timeout for file storage operations.                                                    | `1s`    | no       |

> The default `directory` used for file storage is a subdirectory of the `data-alloy` directory located in the {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} working directory.
>    This will vary depending on the path specified by the [command line flag][run] `--storage-path`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default `directory` used for file storage is a subdirectory of the `data-alloy` directory located in the {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} working directory.
This will vary depending on the path specified by the [command line flag][run] `--storage-path`.
```

> `create_directory` is default `false` in the upstream receiver, but as `directory` defaults to using the `data-alloy` path in {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} it defaults
> to `true` as that directory is treated as owned by the {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`create_directory` is `false` by default in the upstream receiver.  `create_directory` is `true` by default in {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} because `directory` defaults to the `data-alloy` path in {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} and that directory is owned by the {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} process.
```

I'm not sure about this one... I had to read the original multiple times to sort out what was going on. It makes sense, but... I'm trying to find a more direct way of explaining this.

Author: I'll give it some thought! Accepting this for now.

[run]: ../../../cli/run/

## Blocks

> The following blocks are supported inside the definition of
> `otelcol.storage.file`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use the following blocks with `otelcol.storage.file`:
```

> | Hierarchy       | Block             | Description                                                                | Required |
> |-----------------|-------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------|
> | `compaction`    | [compaction][]    | Configures file storage compaction.                                        | no       |
> | `debug_metrics` | [debug_metrics][] | Configures the metrics that this component generates to monitor its state. | no       |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Block                            | Description                                                                | Required |
| -------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------- |
| [`compaction`][compaction]       | Configures file storage compaction.                                        | no       |
| [`debug_metrics`][debug_metrics] | Configures the metrics that this component generates to monitor its state. | no       |
```

We can drop the first column. I'll be updating the rest of the otelcol topics to follow this style after the v1.8 release

| `directory`                     | `string`        | The path to the directory where temporary compaction artifacts will be stored. | *       | no       |
| `max_transaction_size`          | `int`           | Maximum number of items present in a single compaction iteration.              | `65536` | no       |
| `on_rebound`                    | `bool`          | Run compaction online when rebound conditions are met.                         | `false` | no       |
| `on_start`                      | `bool`          | Run compaction on component start.                                             | `false` | no       |
| `rebound_needed_threshold_mib`  | `int`           | File storage total allocated size boundary to mark need for online compaction.       | `100`   | no       |
| `rebound_trigger_threshold_mib` | `int`           | File storage used allocated size boundary to trigger online compaction.        | `10`    | no       |

The default `directory` used for file storage is a subdirectory of the `data-alloy` directory located in the {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} working directory.

>    This will vary depending on the path specified by the [command line flag][run] `--storage-path`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will vary depending on the path specified by the [command line flag][run] `--storage-path`.
```

If `on_rebound` online compaction is enabled, compaction will be triggered when total allocated data is greater than `rebound_needed_threshold_mib` and 
used allocated data is less than `rebound_trigger_threshold_mib`. More detailed information about the way the component supports file compaction for allocated disk storage recovery can be found in the upstream component's [documentation][compaction_docs].

[compaction_docs]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/{{< param "OTEL_VERSION" >}}/extension/storage/filestorage#compaction

### `debug_metrics`

{{< docs/shared lookup="reference/components/otelcol-debug-metrics-block.md" source="alloy" version="<ALLOY_VERSION>" >}}

## Exported fields

The following fields are exported and can be referenced by other components:

> Name | Type | Description
> ---- | ---- | -----------
> `handler` | `capsule(otelcol.Handler)` | A value that other components can use to persist state to file storage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Name      | Type                       | Description                                                             |
| --------- | -------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `handler` | `capsule(otelcol.Handler)` | A value that other components can use to persist state to file storage. |
```

## Component health

> `otelcol.storage.file` is only reported as unhealthy if given an invalid
> configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`otelcol.storage.file` is only reported as unhealthy if given an invalid configuration.
```

## Debug information

> `otelcol.storage.file` does not expose any component-specific debug information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`otelcol.storage.file` doesn't expose any component-specific debug information.
```

## Example

> TBD

Author: Will update these as I test use cases.

---
canonical: https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/reference/components/otelcol/otelcol.storage.file/
description: Learn about otelcol.storage.file
title: otelcol.storage.file
labels:
  stage: public-preview
---

# `otelcol.storage.file`

{{< docs/shared lookup="stability/public_preview.md" source="alloy" version="<ALLOY_VERSION>" >}}

> `otelcol.storage.file` exposes a `handler` that can be used by other `otelcol`
> components to write state to a local directory. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`otelcol.storage.file` exposes a `handler` that other `otelcol` components can use to write state to a local directory. 
```

| `create_directory`      | `bool`          | Will the component be responsible for creating the `directory`.                             | `true`  | no       |
| `directory`             | `string`        | The path to the dedicated data storage directory.                                          | *       | no       |
| `directory_permissions` | `string`        | The octal file permissions used when creating the `directory` if `create_directory` is set. | `0750`  | no       |
| `fsync`                 | `bool`          | Will fsync be called after each write operation.                                            | `false` | no       |
| `timeout`               | `time.Duration` | The timeout for file storage operations.                                                    | `1s`    | no       |

The default `directory` used for file storage is a subdirectory of the `data-alloy` directory located in the {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} working directory.
This will vary depending on the path specified by the [command line flag][run] `--storage-path`.

> `create_directory` is `false` by default in the upstream receiver.  `create_directory` is `true` by default in {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} because `directory` defaults to the `data-alloy` path in {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} and that directory is owned by the {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`create_directory` is `false` by default in the upstream receiver.
`create_directory` is `true` by default in {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} because `directory` defaults to the `data-alloy` path in {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} and that directory is owned by the {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} process.
```
